#LyX 2.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 508
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass achemso
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine natbib
\cite_engine_type numerical
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Gust and windshear risks
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Bret Hess
\end_layout

\begin_layout Affiliation
Physics Department, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah
\end_layout

\begin_layout Email
bret_hess@byu.edu
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Gusts!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Gusts
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Gusts do not appear in 
\begin_inset Formula $V_{Aw},$
\end_inset

 just as they don't appear in the specification of 
\begin_inset Formula $V_{A}$
\end_inset

.
 But for winch launching we should consider them because a lot of elevator
 deflection is used in the rotation, initial climb, and during the main
 climb to balance the negative pitching moment of the rope on the glider.
 So the chance of having a large elevator deflection and strong gusts at
 the same time is more likely.
 JAR-22 doesn't require this analysis for determining 
\begin_inset Formula $V_{A}$
\end_inset

 or 
\begin_inset Formula $V_{w}$
\end_inset

, but the maximum gusts it considers in any case is
\begin_inset Formula $v_{g}=15$
\end_inset

 m/s (30 kts) upward and downward relative to the flight path.
 They give a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

gust mediation
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 method that includes the glider's gradual entrance into a typical gust,
 and the glider's rotational response to it: 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
n_{g}=\frac{1}{2}\frac{\rho S_{w}v_{wy}v_{o}}{W}kC_{L,\alpha}
\]

\end_inset

, where 
\begin_inset Formula $k=\frac{0.88\mu_{r}}{5.3+\mu_{r}},$
\end_inset

 is the gust alleviation factor, and 
\begin_inset Formula $\mu_{r}=\frac{2m}{\rho S_{w}C_{L,\alpha}(1\,meter)}$
\end_inset

 is a mass ratio.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection
Gust probability distribution
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The choice of the specific design gust (
\emph on
perpendicular to the flight path
\begin_inset Formula $)$
\end_inset

 
\emph default
of 15 m/s (30 kts) is derived by civial aviation authorities from the chance
 of gusts greater than this ocurring 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

once in 70,000 flight hours
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "FAAGustAdvisory2014"

\end_inset

.
 Assuming an average winch launch time of 60 seconds, and expressing the
 probability per launch, 
\begin_inset Formula $Prob(15m/s)=\frac{60sec/launch}{70,000hrs\times3600sec/hr}=2\times10^{-7}$
\end_inset

 per launch.
 In other words, it would take on average about 5 million launches for one
 to even 
\emph on
experience
\emph default
 a 30 knot gust perpendicular to the glider.
 This is more than the number of winch launches that have ever ocurred,
 so it's not surprising that the statistics don't show a glider breaking
 up due to gusts!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The probability distributions for extreme vertical gust speeds are well
 approximated (order of magnitude) 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "1999RevMehodsExtremeWinds"

\end_inset

 with the Gumbel distribution, which is of a double-exponential decay form.
 The probability during a launch that any gust observed is greater than
 some speed 
\begin_inset Formula $v$
\end_inset

 is (a cumulative distribution function): 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{equation}
Prob(v)=1-exp\left(-exp\left(-\frac{v}{v_{d}}\right)\right)\label{eq:Gumbel probability distribution-1}
\end{equation}

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $v_{d}$
\end_inset

 is a speed that characterizes the distribution.
 For very low probabilities, 
\begin_inset Formula $Prob(v)\approx exp\left(-\frac{v}{v_{d}}\right)$
\end_inset

.
 Setting this equal to the probability of 
\begin_inset Formula $2\times10^{-7}$
\end_inset

per launch we get 
\begin_inset Formula $v_{d}=\frac{15m/s}{-ln(2\times10^{-7})}$
\end_inset

= 1 m/s.
 We can now use eqn.
 A to find that the chance (in this distribution) of vertical gusts of 
\begin_inset Formula $10$
\end_inset

m/s (20 kts) or more or more is about once in every 30,000 launches.
 Similarly gusts of 5m/s or more (in this distribution) occur about once
 in every 200 launches.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection
Gust time correlations and our choice to launch
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The gust statistics used to establish a 15 m/s (30 kt) come from data amassed
 from many thousands of hours of flight data and have no information about
 the time-correlations of extreme gusts with weaker gusts.
 We all know that it's more likely to experience a very strong gust soon
 after we've experienced other gusts rather than other times.
 So there are really many different distributions of gust probabilities
 that change in time and the information we have about the recent past.
 The winch launch (or aerotow ) extreme gust probabilities are 
\emph on
less
\emph default
 than the probabilities averaged over the life of the glider or pilot simply
 because when we experience poor weather, we stop launching.
 We shut down launching in about 60 sec on learning of poor weather, reducing
 exposure to very extreme gusts in nastier weather.
 On the other hand during a typical soaring flight when we discover bad
 weather the time it takes to escape reduce our risk by changing route or
 landing is closer to an hour, or 60 times longer.
 This means during launch we use our knowledge of current bad weather to
 reduce risk much more effectively than during typical flight..
 It's the 
\emph on
extreme 
\emph default
gusts (probability distribution tails) that are the most time-correlated
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "StatWindGustsBoettcher2003"

\end_inset

 (see the strong dependence of the tails on sampling time in this reference,
 fig 2).
 Hence during launching extreme gusts are much less likely than the FAA
 statistics for general flight.
 In other words, we are warned away from the very infrequent most extreme
 gusts by experiencing a few less extreme gusts; and during launching we
 (as a group) act on the warning, reducing our risk.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection
Gust probabilities vs serious or fatal accident probabilities
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
From Browning's work, the fatal or serious accident rate per launch is 1.1
 per 100,000.
 The chance of gusts causing these accidents is related to the time spent
 in the phases most sensitive to gusts.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Appendices
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Appendix: 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Bibliography
\begin_inset CommandInset bibitem
LatexCommand bibitem
key "key-4"

\end_inset


\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
bibfiles "../../bibtex/winchAccidents,../../bibtex/wingStressesLiftCG,../../bibtex/regulations,../../bibtex/fullPhysSims,../../bibtex/flight&trainingGuidelines,D:/Winch launch physics/winchrep/bibtex/safeFlightSpeedsForRecovery,../../bibtex/gustDistribModels"
options "plain"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
